Hi and welcome back.
In this video, we're talking about files.
This is a new section
and we are really getting into the exciting stuff now,
after these few videos, particularly in this section
and in the next section,
our programmes are going to be able to save their status,
so that we can continue later.
By the way, just as an advance,
in the next section we'll look at databases, cool stuff.
For example, we could write a programme
to store the books we want to read
and they won't be forgotten,
when the programme ends and we start it again,
that way, we can really start
developing larger applications,
now that, you know, the information they hold
starts to persist across run times.
From this section onwards,
we're going to be focusing more on building apps,
as opposed to just learning about concepts,
which is really useful,
I mean, you have to know what you're typing,
before you start typing it,
but the best thing to do is to actually write code,
of course and develop some apps.
So I'd like to apologise if you have been bored
over the last few sections, just learning,
you know, how to do things with Python,
now we're gonna build apps
and things are gonna get more exciting, I promise you
and also, we're going to be writing all our code on PyCharm,
as we've been doing, instead of Ripple eight,
we're gonna start forgetting about Ripple eight
as we focus more on these larger apps.
In Ripple eight, you can't interact
with files and databases and other good stuff,
so that's why we must stop using it now.
If you want to ask any questions
about particular pieces of code,
you can still post your code on Ripple eight
and I'll definitely be able to look at it easily.
I've created a new project here,
I've called it files_project
and I've created an app.py file,
because in this video, we're going to be dealing
with files and particularly text files,
I'm also going to right-click
and create a new, good old normal file
and I'm going to call it data.txt,
the .txt stands for dot text
and this data is going to hold some text data.
Now let's talk about how we can read
the contents of this data file using Python,
of course, right now it's empty,
but we're going to type the name of our friend, Rolf,
just as an example, we're going to read the data in
and print it out, just so you know how easy it is
with Python to read some data out of a file,
it's really straightforward,
all we have to do is open the file,
for which we have to give it the name of the file,
that's data.txt and you can see here,
you've got a nice thing in PyCharm,
where it tells you the arguments of this file,
there's a lot, there's a mode, there's a buffering,
encoding, errors and so forth,
we're only going to do comma r,
r is going to be the mode,
data.txt is going to be the name of the file
and the r stands for reading,
we're going to open a file for reading only,
of course, this opens the file
and that does something at the operating system level,
the operating system now has stored somewhere in its memory
that you have this file open and there's a certain limit
to the number of files you can have open at once.
Now other than the operating system
knowing that this file is now open,
we must also have a way to interact with the file,
for which we have to, of course store this object
that gets returned, it's called a file pointer
into a variable, now that we have in a variable,
we can do things like get a new variable,
which is my_file.read,
.read is going to read the entire contents of the file
as a single string and give it us as file_content.
Now I said earlier, that there's a limit to how many files
you can have simultaneously open in your computer at once,
I'm not lying, so the first thing
is to make sure you close the file, my_file.close,
that returns that file opener to the operating system
and now that file is closed, if you wanted to read it again
or interact with it in any other way,
you will not be able to do so,
however we've already extracted what we wanted from it,
that's the whole contents and we can print them out.
So that's it, that's really as simple as it gets,
let's right-click app.py and run it
and notice how now we get Rolf,
also I've increased the font size
of this command line just for your benefit.
So the file contents is now one long string
and when we call the .read method of the file,
it just goes through the entire file
and gives us all of its contents as a single string,
if the file is really, really long
and some of them can be tens of thousands
or even hundreds of thousands of lines long,
you could have a problem, if you decided to do this,
so we will learn other ways of going about it later on
and also remember, it's really important
to close the file, when we finish,
otherwise Python thinks we still need to keep that open
and it can cause problems, when the file contents change,
it can cause problems with having
too many open at the same time as well.
Now let's move on to writing to the file,
I mean, reading it is fairly straightforward,
just open it in on reading mode is important,
then you read it, then you close it,
then you have the content available,
now let's write to it.
After we've closed the file, that's important,
we can reopen it this time for writing,
so I'm gonna create a my_file_writing variable
and that's gonna be data.txt, but this time w for writing.
Notice by the way, that when we open a file for writing,
that erases the contents of the file and anything we write
will overwrite anything that's already there,
so if you wanna keep the contents of your file,
do not open it in w mode,
there are other ways that you can use,
other modes that won't erase the data there,
and instead it will keep the data there and let you edit it,
editing files, not so easy though
and that's slightly more work.
So now we've got the file open for writing,
we can write something, we can potentially write
the user's name, so that we remember it
from one time we run the programme to another.
Where should we ask the user for their name?
Should we ask for their name after we open the file
or before we open the file?
The answer is before we open the file,
you don't want to have your files open
for any longer than possible
and let's remember, if we have an input here,
the user may never type anything,
potentially they could just run the programme
and then forget about it
and then you would have this data.txt file
open potentially for a long time, you don't want to do that,
so the best thing to do
is to make sure that your files are open
for the smallest period of time possible
and that's almost always a few lines of code,
where you're not asking the user to do anything,
you just open them and close them as quickly as you can.
We've asked the user for their name,
then we've opened the file for writing
and now of course, we can do my_file.writing
my_file_writing and then dot
and when you do that in PyCharm, by the way,
you get all of the methods and properties of the object,
remember the dot means inside,
so here we're looking inside the object
to see what we can use and this is really great from PyCharm
and it lets us look at potentially what we want to call,
sorry, I was reading close there
and I was like, what do we want to close,
we don't wanna close anything just yet,
but nonetheless you can see the close method is here,
we're gonna be calling that in just a moment.
So going through this, there's a lot of stuff,
there is things that you may not understand what they mean,
like readable, readline, readlines,
seek, and whenever you encounter something like this,
that you are interested in,
but you don't know what it means,
Google it, it's really great,
the Python documentation, the official Python guides,
they can be a bit dense, but they have a lot of information
about how to use all these building functions,
like file wrappers and also information
on what these things mean, but of course,
we're gonna go and call the write method
and the write method takes in a string,
that we're going to write to the file
and that's gonna be the user's name,
finally of course, we must close the file,
that's very important, don't forget to do that.
So now, when we run our programme,
the first thing we're gonna do is open our file for reading,
print out the contents,
then we're going to ask the user for their name
and then we're gonna open the file for writing
and write their name to the file,
so if we run the file once, if we run our programme once,
we see Rolf, that's the current contents of the file,
then we can type in our name and then the programme finishes,
we can run it again and now we see
that our name has appeared there, which is fantastic,
it means that the file does know what's going on,
if you look at the file, you can see
that Jose is currently in the file contents,
then I'm gonna type Rolf, press Enter
and if we go back to the data.txt,
we see that Rolf is now in there.
Over the next few videos, we're going to look at
storing more than just a single string in the file,
or rather a single value in the file,
by looking at CSV files, Comma Separated Value files,
JSON files, Javascript Object Notation files
and also how we can do things like import
and things like that to make dealing with files easier
and also remember, we never told the file
to delete the contents, but as I said earlier,
the w mode overwrites everything that's in the file,
so if you open your files with w mode, they get deleted,
whatever you write becomes the new content,
be careful with that,
it's a dangerous operation, use it carefully.
That's it for this video,
I just wanted to show you the syntax for opening a new file
and two of the modes, r and w,
there's quite a few more modes
and in the Further Reading section, lecture of this section,
I'm going to include a link to a couple more of the modes,
so that you can experiment with them
and have a wee look at them as well.
So that's it for this video, I'll see you on the next one.